Docs/Specs/epic-181-build-workflows/components/ai-sentinel-base.md, before:

# Component: AI Sentinel Base

**Last Updated:** 2025-09-22
**Component Status:** Complete - Production Ready
**Feature Context:** [Feature: Iterative AI Code Review](../README.md)
**Epic Context:** [Epic #181: Standardize Build Workflows](../README.md)

> **Parent:** [`Epic #181 Components`](../README.md)

## 1. Purpose & Responsibility

* **What it is:** GitHub Actions framework component providing common infrastructure for all AI Sentinel implementations, including template management, context injection, error handling, and analysis orchestration with comprehensive security controls.

* **Key Technical Responsibilities:**
  - Manage AI prompt template loading, validation, and dynamic context injection with security sanitization
  - Provide unified error handling and failure recovery patterns for all AI analysis components
  - Implement duplicate analysis prevention and skip logic for efficient workflow execution
  - Enable secure AI service authentication and communication patterns with proper token management

* **Implementation Success Criteria:** ✅ **ACHIEVED**
  - ✅ Template system preserves existing prompt engineering sophistication while improving modularity
  - ✅ Security framework prevents prompt injection and ensures analysis result integrity
  - ✅ Error handling maintains workflow stability during AI service failures or quota limitations
  - ✅ Performance optimization reduces AI analysis overhead while maintaining analysis quality

* **Why it exists:** Establishes the foundational framework enabling Epic #181's iterative AI code review implementation by extracting common patterns from the 5 existing AI Sentinels while enhancing security and maintainability.

## 2. Architecture & Key Concepts

* **Technical Design:** Template Method pattern implementation providing common AI analysis infrastructure with Strategy pattern integration for specialized analysis types, featuring comprehensive security controls and error resilience.

* **Implementation Logic Flow:**
  1. Validate analysis type and load corresponding prompt template with security validation
  2. Extract and sanitize PR context data for secure AI service consumption
  3. Perform duplicate analysis detection using existing comment checking mechanisms
  4. Execute placeholder replacement with secure context injection and input filtering
  5. Submit analysis request to AI service with proper authentication and error handling
  6. Process and validate AI response for integrity and format compliance
  7. Handle analysis results with proper error recovery and PR comment integration

* **Key Technical Elements:**
  - **Template Management System**: Secure prompt template loading with injection prevention
  - **Context Injection Engine**: Dynamic placeholder replacement with input sanitization
  - **Security Framework**: Comprehensive prompt injection prevention and result validation
  - **Authentication Layer**: Secure AI service token handling and rotation patterns
  - **Error Handling System**: Graceful failure recovery with comprehensive logging
  - **Skip Logic Engine**: Intelligent duplicate analysis prevention and re-analysis support

* **Data Structures:**
  - Input: Analysis type, template path, context data, configuration parameters
  - Output: Structured analysis results, metadata, recommendations, error details
  - Internal: Template cache, context sanitization rules, authentication tokens
  - Security: Input validation rules, output sanitization patterns, integrity checksums

* **Processing Pipeline:** Template validation → Context extraction → Security sanitization → Placeholder injection → AI service communication → Result validation → Output formatting

* **Component Architecture:**
  ```mermaid
  graph TD
      A[Analysis Request] --> B[Template Validation];
      B --> C[Context Extraction];
      C --> D[Security Sanitization];
      D --> E[Duplicate Check];
      E -->|Skip| F[Skip Response];
      E -->|Continue| G[Placeholder Injection];
      G --> H[AI Service Auth];
      H --> I[Analysis Execution];
      I --> J{Success?};
      J -->|Yes| K[Result Validation];
      J -->|No| L[Error Handler];
      K --> M[Output Formatting];
      L --> N[Failure Recovery];
      F --> O[Final Response];
      M --> O;
      N --> O;
  ```

## 3. Interface Contract & Assumptions

* **Key Technical Interfaces:**
  - **Primary Analysis Interface:**
    * **Purpose:** Provide secure, reusable AI analysis infrastructure for all Sentinel implementations
    * **Input Specifications:**
      - `analysis_type` (string, required): Type of AI analysis (testing, standards, security, debt, merge)
      - `template_path` (string, required): Path to prompt template file within repository
      - `context_data` (string, required): JSON-formatted analysis context and metadata
      - `skip_duplicate` (boolean, optional): Enable duplicate analysis prevention (default: true)
      - `max_retries` (number, optional): Maximum retry attempts for transient failures (default: 3)
      - `timeout_seconds` (number, optional): Analysis timeout in seconds (default: 300)
    * **Output Specifications:**
      - `analysis_result` (string): Structured AI analysis output in JSON format
      - `analysis_summary` (string): Human-readable analysis summary for PR comments
      - `recommendations` (string): JSON array of actionable improvement recommendations
      - `analysis_metadata` (string): Execution metadata including timing, token usage, version info
      - `skip_reason` (string): Reason for skipping analysis (if applicable)
      - `error_details` (string): Detailed error information for failed analyses
    * **Error Handling:** Comprehensive error capture with categorization, retry logic for transient failures, graceful degradation with informative error reporting
    * **Performance Characteristics:** 30-300 seconds typical execution time, memory usage <500MB, concurrent execution support

* **Critical Technical Assumptions:**
  - **Platform Assumptions:** GitHub Actions environment with secure secrets management, AI service availability and authentication
  - **Integration Assumptions:** extract-pr-context, check-existing-comment, handle-ai-analysis-failure shared actions maintain stable interfaces
  - **Configuration Assumptions:** Prompt templates follow established format and security patterns, AI service authentication configured properly

## 4. Local Conventions & Constraints (Beyond Global Standards)

* **Implementation Patterns:**
  - Template Method pattern for common analysis workflow with specialized strategy implementations
  - Secure placeholder replacement using whitelist-based context injection with input validation
  - Token rotation and authentication patterns following GitHub Actions security best practices
  - Structured error handling with categorized failure modes and appropriate recovery strategies

* **Technology Stack:**
  - GitHub Actions composite action with Node.js/TypeScript implementation for complex logic
  - OpenAI API client libraries with proper authentication and rate limiting
  - JSON schema validation for template and context data integrity verification
  - Cryptographic libraries for secure token handling and integrity verification

* **Resource Requirements:**
  - Memory usage target <500MB for analysis processing and context management
  - Network bandwidth optimization for large context data and AI service communication
  - CPU usage optimization for template processing and context sanitization
  - Secure temporary storage for sensitive analysis data with proper cleanup

## 5. How to Work With This Component

* **Development Environment:**
  - Node.js 18+ with TypeScript support for local development and testing
  - OpenAI API access with development quota for testing AI integration patterns
  - JSON schema validation tools for template and context data verification
  - Security testing tools for prompt injection testing and vulnerability assessment

* **Testing Approach:**
  - **Unit Testing:** Template processing, context sanitization, error handling logic with comprehensive security scenarios
  - **Integration Testing:** AI service communication, shared action integration, end-to-end analysis workflows
  - **Security Testing:** Prompt injection prevention, context sanitization validation, authentication security verification
  - **Performance Testing:** Analysis execution time, memory usage optimization, concurrent execution validation

* **Debugging and Troubleshooting:**
  - Comprehensive logging for template processing, context injection, and AI service communication
  - Debug mode for detailed analysis workflow tracing and security validation
  - Error categorization for systematic troubleshooting and resolution guidance
  - Security audit logging for prompt injection attempts and unauthorized access detection

## 6. Dependencies

* **Direct Technical Dependencies:**
  - [`extract-pr-context`](/.github/actions/shared/extract-pr-context/) - PR metadata extraction and context preparation
  - [`check-existing-comment`](/.github/actions/shared/check-existing-comment/) - Duplicate analysis prevention
  - [`handle-ai-analysis-failure`](/.github/actions/shared/handle-ai-analysis-failure/) - Error handling and PR comments
  - OpenAI API client libraries - AI service communication and authentication

* **External Dependencies:**
  - OpenAI/Claude AI services for analysis execution with proper authentication and rate limiting
  - GitHub Actions secrets management for secure token storage and rotation
  - Node.js runtime environment with required security and networking capabilities
  - No additional external services required for core framework functionality

* **Component Dependencies:**
  - Foundation for: ai-testing-analysis, ai-standards-analysis, ai-security-analysis, ai-tech-debt-analysis, ai-merge-orchestrator
  - Integrates with: All AI Sentinel implementations requiring common infrastructure and security patterns
  - Supports: Iterative AI review implementation and specialized analysis workflows

## 7. Rationale & Key Historical Context

* **Implementation Approach:** Extracted common patterns from 5 existing AI Sentinels (430+ lines) to eliminate duplication while preserving sophisticated prompt engineering and enhancing security controls throughout the framework.

* **Technology Selection:** Node.js/TypeScript chosen for complex logic processing and security validation, GitHub Actions composite pattern for portability and integration with existing shared action ecosystem.

* **Security Considerations:**
  - **Prompt Injection Prevention**: Strict template validation with whitelist-based context injection preventing malicious prompt manipulation
  - **Context Sanitization**: Comprehensive input filtering and validation ensuring secure AI service communication
  - **Authentication Security**: Secure token handling with rotation patterns and proper GitHub Actions secrets integration
  - **Result Validation**: AI analysis output integrity verification with tampering detection and format validation
  - **Error Handling Security**: Secure failure mode handling preventing information disclosure through error messages

* **Performance Optimization:** Template caching, context processing optimization, and concurrent execution support designed to minimize AI analysis overhead while maintaining sophisticated analysis capabilities.

## 8. Known Issues & TODOs

* **Technical Limitations:**
  - AI service rate limiting may require sophisticated queuing and retry mechanisms for high-volume analysis
  - Large context data may exceed AI service token limits, requiring intelligent context summarization
  - Template validation currently static, could be enhanced with dynamic security rule updates

* **Implementation Debt:**
  - Initial implementation focuses on OpenAI integration, multi-provider support requires abstraction layer enhancement
  - Error handling could be enhanced with more granular categorization and automated resolution suggestions
  - Performance monitoring integration requires enhanced metrics collection and analysis

* **Enhancement Opportunities:**
  - Multi-provider AI service support with failover and load balancing capabilities
  - Advanced context processing with intelligent summarization and relevance filtering
  - Machine learning-based analysis optimization with feedback loop integration
  - Enhanced security monitoring with automated threat detection and response

* **Monitoring and Observability:**
  - AI service usage metrics for cost optimization and capacity planning
  - Analysis quality metrics for continuous improvement and effectiveness measurement
  - Security event monitoring for prompt injection attempts and unauthorized access detection
  - Performance metrics collection for optimization opportunities and resource planning

## 9. Implementation Summary

### ✅ Production Implementation Complete (2025-09-22)

**Component Location:** `.github/actions/shared/ai-sentinel-base/`

**Implementation Achievement:**
- ✅ **Secure Foundation**: Complete AI framework foundation with comprehensive security controls
- ✅ **Template System**: Secure prompt template system with injection prevention and integrity verification
- ✅ **Security Controls**: All critical security requirements implemented including authentication and result validation
- ✅ **Integration Ready**: Successfully integrated with coverage-build.yml workflow

**Security Implementation Status:**
- ✅ **Prompt Injection Prevention**: Strict template validation and sanitization implemented
- ✅ **Context Sanitization**: Secure placeholder replacement with input filtering
- ✅ **Authentication Security**: Secure AI service token handling and rotation
- ✅ **Result Integrity**: AI analysis output validation and tampering detection

**Integration Patterns:**
- Successfully provides foundation for ai-testing-analysis and ai-standards-analysis components
- Integrates with existing shared actions: extract-pr-context, check-existing-comment, handle-ai-analysis-failure
- Supports Epic #181 AI framework progression and Epic #94 coverage milestone

**Usage Examples:**
- Used by coverage-build.yml for intelligent coverage analysis
- Foundation for all specialized AI Sentinel implementations
- Security-first AI analysis with comprehensive error handling

---

Commit message:

feat: rebrand coverage ecosystem (#233) (#277)
* feat(ci,docs): rebrand coverage ecosystem to testing coverage; fix scheduler step refs and prompt link (#233)

* chore(prompts): update testing-coverage agent doc link to renamed AutomatedTestingCoverageWorkflow.md (#233)

* fix(tests): correct internal using namespaces from Zarichney.Server.Tests.* to Zarichney.Tests.*; fix static imports; and repair validation script (scheduler cron + base-10 hour) (#233)

* fix(prompts): restore {{COVERAGE_EPIC_CONTEXT}} placeholder for auditor prompt compatibility (#233)

Docs/Specs/epic-181-build-workflows/components/ai-sentinel-base.md, after:

# Component: AI Sentinel Base

**Last Updated:** 2025-09-22
**Component Status:** Complete - Production Ready
**Feature Context:** [Feature: Iterative AI Code Review](../README.md)
**Epic Context:** [Epic #181: Standardize Build Workflows](../README.md)

> **Parent:** [`Epic #181 Components`](../README.md)

## 1. Purpose & Responsibility

* **What it is:** GitHub Actions framework component providing common infrastructure for all AI Sentinel implementations, including template management, context injection, error handling, and analysis orchestration with comprehensive security controls.

* **Key Technical Responsibilities:**
  - Manage AI prompt template loading, validation, and dynamic context injection with security sanitization
  - Provide unified error handling and failure recovery patterns for all AI analysis components
  - Implement duplicate analysis prevention and skip logic for efficient workflow execution
  - Enable secure AI service authentication and communication patterns with proper token management

* **Implementation Success Criteria:** ✅ **ACHIEVED**
  - ✅ Template system preserves existing prompt engineering sophistication while improving modularity
  - ✅ Security framework prevents prompt injection and ensures analysis result integrity
  - ✅ Error handling maintains workflow stability during AI service failures or quota limitations
  - ✅ Performance optimization reduces AI analysis overhead while maintaining analysis quality

* **Why it exists:** Establishes the foundational framework enabling Epic #181's iterative AI code review implementation by extracting common patterns from the 5 existing AI Sentinels while enhancing security and maintainability for testing excellence goals.

## 2. Architecture & Key Concepts

* **Technical Design:** Template Method pattern implementation providing common AI analysis infrastructure with Strategy pattern integration for specialized analysis types, featuring comprehensive security controls and error resilience.

* **Implementation Logic Flow:**
  1. Validate analysis type and load corresponding prompt template with security validation
  2. Extract and sanitize PR context data for secure AI service consumption
  3. Perform duplicate analysis detection using existing comment checking mechanisms
  4. Execute placeholder replacement with secure context injection and input filtering
  5. Submit analysis request to AI service with proper authentication and error handling
  6. Process and validate AI response for integrity and format compliance
  7. Handle analysis results with proper error recovery and PR comment integration

* **Key Technical Elements:**
  - **Template Management System**: Secure prompt template loading with injection prevention
  - **Context Injection Engine**: Dynamic placeholder replacement with input sanitization
  - **Security Framework**: Comprehensive prompt injection prevention and result validation
  - **Authentication Layer**: Secure AI service token handling and rotation patterns
  - **Error Handling System**: Graceful failure recovery with comprehensive logging
  - **Skip Logic Engine**: Intelligent duplicate analysis prevention and re-analysis support

* **Data Structures:**
  - Input: Analysis type, template path, context data, configuration parameters
  - Output: Structured analysis results, metadata, recommendations, error details
  - Internal: Template cache, context sanitization rules, authentication tokens
  - Security: Input validation rules, output sanitization patterns, integrity checksums

* **Processing Pipeline:** Template validation → Context extraction → Security sanitization → Placeholder injection → AI service communication → Result validation → Output formatting

* **Component Architecture:**
  ```mermaid
  graph TD
      A[Analysis Request] --> B[Template Validation];
      B --> C[Context Extraction];
      C --> D[Security Sanitization];
      D --> E[Duplicate Check];
      E -->|Skip| F[Skip Response];
      E -->|Continue| G[Placeholder Injection];
      G --> H[AI Service Auth];
      H --> I[Analysis Execution];
      I --> J{Success?};
      J -->|Yes| K[Result Validation];
      J -->|No| L[Error Handler];
      K --> M[Output Formatting];
      L --> N[Failure Recovery];
      F --> O[Final Response];
      M --> O;
      N --> O;
  ```

## 3. Interface Contract & Assumptions

* **Key Technical Interfaces:**
  - **Primary Analysis Interface:**
    * **Purpose:** Provide secure, reusable AI analysis infrastructure for all Sentinel implementations
    * **Input Specifications:**
      - `analysis_type` (string, required): Type of AI analysis (testing, standards, security, debt, merge)
      - `template_path` (string, required): Path to prompt template file within repository
      - `context_data` (string, required): JSON-formatted analysis context and metadata
      - `skip_duplicate` (boolean, optional): Enable duplicate analysis prevention (default: true)
      - `max_retries` (number, optional): Maximum retry attempts for transient failures (default: 3)
      - `timeout_seconds` (number, optional): Analysis timeout in seconds (default: 300)
    * **Output Specifications:**
      - `analysis_result` (string): Structured AI analysis output in JSON format
      - `analysis_summary` (string): Human-readable analysis summary for PR comments
      - `recommendations` (string): JSON array of actionable improvement recommendations
      - `analysis_metadata` (string): Execution metadata including timing, token usage, version info
      - `skip_reason` (string): Reason for skipping analysis (if applicable)
      - `error_details` (string): Detailed error information for failed analyses
    * **Error Handling:** Comprehensive error capture with categorization, retry logic for transient failures, graceful degradation with informative error reporting
    * **Performance Characteristics:** 30-300 seconds typical execution time, memory usage <500MB, concurrent execution support

* **Critical Technical Assumptions:**
  - **Platform Assumptions:** GitHub Actions environment with secure secrets management, AI service availability and authentication
  - **Integration Assumptions:** extract-pr-context, check-existing-comment, handle-ai-analysis-failure shared actions maintain stable interfaces
  - **Configuration Assumptions:** Prompt templates follow established format and security patterns, AI service authentication configured properly

## 4. Local Conventions & Constraints (Beyond Global Standards)

* **Implementation Patterns:**
  - Template Method pattern for common analysis workflow with specialized strategy implementations
  - Secure placeholder replacement using whitelist-based context injection with input validation
  - Token rotation and authentication patterns following GitHub Actions security best practices
  - Structured error handling with categorized failure modes and appropriate recovery strategies

* **Technology Stack:**
  - GitHub Actions composite action with Node.js/TypeScript implementation for complex logic
  - OpenAI API client libraries with proper authentication and rate limiting
  - JSON schema validation for template and context data integrity verification
  - Cryptographic libraries for secure token handling and integrity verification

* **Resource Requirements:**
  - Memory usage target <500MB for analysis processing and context management
  - Network bandwidth optimization for large context data and AI service communication
  - CPU usage optimization for template processing and context sanitization
  - Secure temporary storage for sensitive analysis data with proper cleanup

## 5. How to Work With This Component

* **Development Environment:**
  - Node.js 18+ with TypeScript support for local development and testing
  - OpenAI API access with development quota for testing AI integration patterns
  - JSON schema validation tools for template and context data verification
  - Security testing tools for prompt injection testing and vulnerability assessment

* **Testing Approach:**
  - **Unit Testing:** Template processing, context sanitization, error handling logic with comprehensive security scenarios
  - **Integration Testing:** AI service communication, shared action integration, end-to-end analysis workflows
  - **Security Testing:** Prompt injection prevention, context sanitization validation, authentication security verification
  - **Performance Testing:** Analysis execution time, memory usage optimization, concurrent execution validation

* **Debugging and Troubleshooting:**
  - Comprehensive logging for template processing, context injection, and AI service communication
  - Debug mode for detailed analysis workflow tracing and security validation
  - Error categorization for systematic troubleshooting and resolution guidance
  - Security audit logging for prompt injection attempts and unauthorized access detection

## 6. Dependencies

* **Direct Technical Dependencies:**
  - [`extract-pr-context`](/.github/actions/shared/extract-pr-context/) - PR metadata extraction and context preparation
  - [`check-existing-comment`](/.github/actions/shared/check-existing-comment/) - Duplicate analysis prevention
  - [`handle-ai-analysis-failure`](/.github/actions/shared/handle-ai-analysis-failure/) - Error handling and PR comments
  - OpenAI API client libraries - AI service communication and authentication

* **External Dependencies:**
  - OpenAI/Claude AI services for analysis execution with proper authentication and rate limiting
  - GitHub Actions secrets management for secure token storage and rotation
  - Node.js runtime environment with required security and networking capabilities
  - No additional external services required for core framework functionality

* **Component Dependencies:**
  - Foundation for: ai-testing-analysis, ai-standards-analysis, ai-security-analysis, ai-tech-debt-analysis, ai-merge-orchestrator
  - Integrates with: All AI Sentinel implementations requiring common infrastructure and security patterns
  - Supports: Iterative AI review implementation and specialized analysis workflows

## 7. Rationale & Key Historical Context

* **Implementation Approach:** Extracted common patterns from 5 existing AI Sentinels (430+ lines) to eliminate duplication while preserving sophisticated prompt engineering and enhancing security controls throughout the framework.

* **Technology Selection:** Node.js/TypeScript chosen for complex logic processing and security validation, GitHub Actions composite pattern for portability and integration with existing shared action ecosystem.

* **Security Considerations:**
  - **Prompt Injection Prevention**: Strict template validation with whitelist-based context injection preventing malicious prompt manipulation
  - **Context Sanitization**: Comprehensive input filtering and validation ensuring secure AI service communication
  - **Authentication Security**: Secure token handling with rotation patterns and proper GitHub Actions secrets integration
  - **Result Validation**: AI analysis output integrity verification with tampering detection and format validation
  - **Error Handling Security**: Secure failure mode handling preventing information disclosure through error messages

* **Performance Optimization:** Template caching, context processing optimization, and concurrent execution support designed to minimize AI analysis overhead while maintaining sophisticated analysis capabilities.

## 8. Known Issues & TODOs

* **Technical Limitations:**
  - AI service rate limiting may require sophisticated queuing and retry mechanisms for high-volume analysis
  - Large context data may exceed AI service token limits, requiring intelligent context summarization
  - Template validation currently static, could be enhanced with dynamic security rule updates

* **Implementation Debt:**
  - Initial implementation focuses on OpenAI integration, multi-provider support requires abstraction layer enhancement
  - Error handling could be enhanced with more granular categorization and automated resolution suggestions
  - Performance monitoring integration requires enhanced metrics collection and analysis

* **Enhancement Opportunities:**
  - Multi-provider AI service support with failover and load balancing capabilities
  - Advanced context processing with intelligent summarization and relevance filtering
  - Machine learning-based analysis optimization with feedback loop integration
  - Enhanced security monitoring with automated threat detection and response

* **Monitoring and Observability:**
  - AI service usage metrics for cost optimization and capacity planning
  - Analysis quality metrics for continuous improvement and effectiveness measurement
  - Security event monitoring for prompt injection attempts and unauthorized access detection
  - Performance metrics collection for optimization opportunities and resource planning

## 9. Implementation Summary

### ✅ Production Implementation Complete (2025-09-22)

**Component Location:** `.github/actions/shared/ai-sentinel-base/`

**Implementation Achievement:**
- ✅ **Secure Foundation**: Complete AI framework foundation with comprehensive security controls
- ✅ **Template System**: Secure prompt template system with injection prevention and integrity verification
- ✅ **Security Controls**: All critical security requirements implemented including authentication and result validation
- ✅ **Integration Ready**: Successfully integrated with testing-coverage-build-review.yml workflow

**Security Implementation Status:**
- ✅ **Prompt Injection Prevention**: Strict template validation and sanitization implemented
- ✅ **Context Sanitization**: Secure placeholder replacement with input filtering
- ✅ **Authentication Security**: Secure AI service token handling and rotation
- ✅ **Result Integrity**: AI analysis output validation and tampering detection

**Integration Patterns:**
- Successfully provides foundation for ai-testing-analysis and ai-standards-analysis components
- Integrates with existing shared actions: extract-pr-context, check-existing-comment, handle-ai-analysis-failure
- Supports Epic #181 AI framework progression and Epic #94 coverage milestone

**Usage Examples:**
- Used by testing-coverage-build-review.yml for intelligent coverage analysis
- Foundation for all specialized AI Sentinel implementations
- Security-first AI analysis with comprehensive error handling

---
